# Grassmann Algebra

<div id="kalx">kal@kalx.net</div>
	
<div class="para">
How to reduce geometric facts to algebraic calculation.
</div> <div class="para">

Boole reduced reasoning to algebra.

Boole (1854). _An Investigation of the Laws of Thought_. Walton & Maberly
</div> <div class="para">

Grassmann reduced geometry to algebra.

A1: 1844. Die lineale Ausdehnungslehre. Leipzig: Wiegand.

A2: 1862. Die Ausdehnungslehre. Vollständig und in strenger Form
begründet. Berlin: Enslin.

G. Peano, "Calcolo geometric0 second0 I’Ausdehnungslehre di
H. Grassmann," Fratelli Bocca Editori, Torino, 1888.

Marilena Barnabei, Andrea Brini, Gian-Carlo Rota ["On the Exterior Calculus
of Invariant Theory](http://kalx.net/dsS2011/BarBriRot1985.pdf),"
_Journal of Algebra_ **96**, 120-160 (1985) 
</div> <div class="para">

> "The full extent of the tragedy of Hermann Grassmann, which has been unfolding since his death, by a succession of misadventures and misunderstandings of his work unique in the history of modern mathematics, is yet to be fully realized. It began with a deliberate ambiguity on the part of the author of the “Ausdehnungslehre,” whereby one and the same notation was chosen to designate two different algebraic operations, originally known as the progressive and the regressive product. This choice was not an oversight on Grassmann’s part, as we shall see, but was rather dictated by the author’s deep understanding of the philosophical reach of his discovery, an understanding which lay well beyond the powers of the ordinary mathematician of the time." 

</div> <div class="para">
</div> <div class="para">
</div> <div class="para">

$E$ - Euclidean space (of $n$-dimensions).
</div> <div class="para">

$\Alg(E)$ - Algebra generated by $E$ ($\{a + bP + cQ + dRS + \dots\}$).
</div> <div class="para">

$\mathcal{G}(E) = \Alg(E)/P^2$ - Grassmann algebra.
</div> <div class="para">

$0 = (P + Q)^2 = PP + PQ + QP + QQ = PQ + QP$ so $PQ = -QP$.
</div> <div class="para">

$R(t) = P +  t(Q - P) = (1-t)P + tQ$.
</div> <div class="para">

$PR(t) = tPQ$.
</div> <div class="para">

$R(t)Q = (1-t)PQ$.
</div> <div class="para">

$R(t) = (R(t)Q/PQ)P + (PR(t)/PQ)Q$.
</div> <div class="para">

For any points $P$, $Q$, and $R$ on the line $PQ$, $R = (RQ/PQ)P + (PR/PQ)Q$.
</div> <div class="para">

$R$ is between $P$ and $Q$ if $RQ/PQ$ and $PR/PQ$ are both positive.
</div> <div class="para">

Hilbert pointed out Euclid forgot to define "between".
</div> <div class="para">

For any points $P$, $Q$, $R$, and $S$ in the plane $PQR$,
$S = (SQR/PQR)P + (PSR/PQR)Q + (PQS/PRQ)R$.
</div> <div class="para">

$S$ is inside the triangle $PQR$ if all coefficients are positive.
</div> <div class="para">

One Period model: $x\in\mathbf{R}^m\mapsto X\colon\Omega \to \mathbf{R}^m$.
</div> <div class="para">

Arbitrage: $\gamma\in\mathbf{R}^m$ with $\gamma\cdot x < 0$
and $\gamma\cdot X(w) \ge0$ for all $\omega\in\Omega$.
</div> <div class="para">

Fundamental Theorem of Asset Pricing: No arbitrage if and only if
$x$ is in the smallest cone containing the range of $X$, $X(\Omega)$.
</div> <div class="para">

Example: $x = [1,100,6]$, $\Omega = \{90,100,110\}$,
$X(\omega) = [1, \omega, \max\{\omega - 100,0\}]$.
</div> <div class="para">

In the bond price equal one plane we must have
$x = [100,6]$ inside of $X(90) = [90,0]$,
$X(100) = [100,0]$, and $X(110) = [110,10]$.
</div> <div class="para">

This is reduced to computing $X(90) X(100) X(110)$,
$x X(100) X(110)$,
$X(90) x X(110)$, and
$X(90) X(100) x$
</div> <div class="para">

Example: $x = [1, s, c_1, \dots]$, $\Omega = [L,H]$,
$X(\omega) = [R, \omega, (\omega - k_1)^+, \dots]$.
</div> <div class="para">

Arb finding becomes a calculation of
$X(L) X(k_1) \dots X(H)$ and replacing each point
by $x$.
</div>
