---
title: A Unified Model of Derivative Securities
author: Keith A. Lewis
institution: KALX, LLC
email: kal@kalx.net
classoption: fleqn
abstract: |
	Market instruments can be bought or sold at a price and entail cash flows.
	Every arbitrage-free model of prices and cash flows
	is parameterized by a positive, adapted process and
	a vector-valued martingale whose components are
	indexed by market instruments.
	This can be used to value, hedge, and manage the
	risk of derivative securities.
...


A _derivative security_ is a contract between two parties: I will
give you this on these dates if you will give me that on those dates.
Derivatives must have existed since before recorded history.  The Nobel
prize winning breakthrough of Black, Scholes, and Merton was to show
how to synthesize derivatives by dynamically trading market instruments
based on the borrowing cost used to fund the hedge instead of trying to
estimate the the actual growth rate of the underlying securities.

This short note provides a unified model for valuing, hedging, and
managing the risk of any derivative security. It shows how they can
be synthesized by trading market instruments and turns the spotlight on
what may be the next Nobel prize winning problem: how should you hedge
if you can't do it continuously?

## Notation

If $\AA$ is an
[_algebra_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebra_of_sets)
on the set $\Omega$ we write
$X\colon\AA\to\mathbf{R}$ to indicate $X\colon\Omega\to\mathbf{R}$
is $\AA$-[_measurable_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Measurable_function).
If $\AA$ is finite then the
[_atoms_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom_(measure_theory))
of $\AA$ form a
[_partition_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_of_a_set)
of $\Omega$ and being measurable is
equivalent to being constant on atoms. In this case $X$ is indeed a function
on the atoms.

If $\AA$ is an algebra of sets, the
[_conditional expectation_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conditional_expectation)
of $X$ given
$\AA$ is defined by $Y = E\left\lbrack X | \AA\right\rbrack$ if and only
if $Y$ is $\AA$ measurable and $\int_A Y\,dP = \int_A X\,dP$
for all $A\in\AA$. This is equivalent to $Y(P|_\AA)
= (XP)|_\AA$ where the vertical bar indicates restriction of a measure.

A _filtration_ indexed by $T\subseteq [0,\infty)$ is an increasing
collection of algebras, $(\AA_t)_{t\in T}$.  A process
$M_{t}\colon\AA_{t} \rightarrow \mathbf{R}$, $t\in T$, is
a _martingale_ if $M_t = E[M_u | \AA_t] = E_t[M_u]$ for $t\le u$.

A _stopping time_ is a function $\tau\colon\Omega\to T$ such that
$\{\omega\in\Omega\mid \tau(\omega) \le t\}$ belongs to $\AA_t$, $t\in T$.

## Market Model

Every _instrument_ has a _price_, $X_t$, and a _cash flow_, $C_t$, at any
trading time, $t\in T$.  Instruments are assumed to be perfectly liquid:
they can be bought or sold at the given price in any amount. Cash flows
are associated with owning an instrument and are almost always 0, e.g., stocks
have dividends, bonds have coupons, European options have exactly one
cash flow at expiration, futures always have price 0.

A _market model_ specifies _prices_
$X_{t}:\AA_{t} \rightarrow \mathbf{R}^{I}$, and _cash flows_
$C_{t}:\AA_{t} \rightarrow \mathbf{R}^{I}$, where $I$ are the
available market instruments.

## Trading

A _trading strategy_ is a finite collection of strictly increasing
stopping times, $\tau_{j}$, and trades, $\Gamma_{j}:\AA_{\tau_{j}}
\rightarrow \mathbf{R}^{I}$ indicating the number of shares to trade
in each instrument. Trades accumulate to a _position_, $\Delta_{t} =
\sum_{\tau_{j} < t}\Gamma_{j} = \sum_{s < t}\Gamma_{s}$ where $\Gamma_{s}
= \Gamma_{j}$ when $s = \tau_{j}$.  Note the trade at time $t$ is not
included in the position at time $t$: it takes some time for trades
to settle.

The _value_ (or _mark-to-market_) of a position at time $t$ is $V_{t} =
\left( \Delta_{t} + \Gamma_{t} \right) \cdot X_{t}$: what you would get
from liquidating your existing position and the trades just executed.
The _amount_ generated by the trading strategy at time $t$ is $A_{t} =
\Delta_{t} \cdot C_{t} - \Gamma_{t} \cdot X_{t}$: you receive the cash
flows associated with your existing position and pay for the trades you
just executed.

## Arbitrage

Arbitrage is a trading strategy with $A_{\tau_{0}} > 0$, $A_{t} \geq 0$
for $t > \tau_{0}$ and $\sum_{j}^{}{\Gamma_{j} = 0}$: you make money
on the first trade and never lose until the strategy is closed out.

The Fundamental Theorem of Asset Pricing states there is no arbitrage
if and only if there exists a _deflator_, $D_{t}:\AA_{t} \rightarrow \left(
0,\infty \right)$, with

$$\begin{matrix}
X_{t}D_{t} = E_t[X_v D_v + \sum_{t < u \leq v} C_u D_u].\label{eq:1} \\
\end{matrix}$$

We can assume $D_0 = 1$. If $(D_t)$ is a deflator then so is $(D_t/D_0)$.

Note that if there are no cash flows, $C_t = 0$ for all $t \in T$,
this says $X_tD_t$ is a martingale. For an infinite time horizon where
the price times the deflator goes to 0, this says the current price is
the expected price of discounted future cash flows, just as in Dodd and
Graham valuation.

A consequence of the above and the definition of value and amount is

\begin{align*}
V_t D_t = E_t[V_v D_v + \sum_{t < u \leq v}A_u D_u].\label{eq:2} \\
\end{align*}

Note the similarity to the previous displayed equation. Value
corresponds to price and amount corresponds to cash flow.
This equation is the skeleton key for valuing derivative securities.
It shows how dynamic trading can create synthetic market instruments.

If $u > t$ is sufficiently small then $X_t D_t = E_t[(X_u + C_u) D_u]$
and $V_t D_t = (\Delta_{t} + \Gamma_t)\cdot X_{t} D_t = \Delta_u\cdot
E_t[(X_u + C_u) D_u]$.  Since $\Delta_u\cdot C_u = \Gamma_u\cdot X_u +
A_u$ we have $V_t D_t = E_t[(\Delta_u\cdot X_u + \Gamma_u\cdot X_u +
A_u) D_u] = E_t[(V_u + A_u)D_u]$. The formula above follows by induction.

For a trading strategy that closes out,
$V_{\tau_0} D_{\tau_0} = E_{\tau_0}[\sum_{t > \tau_{0}}{A_{t}D_{t}] \geq 0}$. 
Since $V_{\tau_0} =
\Gamma_{\tau_0} \cdot X_{\tau_0}$, $A_{\tau_0} = - \Gamma_{\tau_0} \cdot X_{\tau_0}$, and $D_{\tau_0} > 0$ we have
$A_{\tau_0} \leq 0$.
This proves the "easy" direction of the FTAP.

There is no need to prove the "hard" direction since we have a large supply of arbitrage free models:
every arbitrage-free model has the form
$X_{t}D_{t} = M_{t} - \sum_{s \leq t}{C_{s}D_{s}}$ where
$M_{t}:\AA_{t} \rightarrow \mathbf{R}^{I}$ is a martingale and
$D_{t}:\AA_{t} \rightarrow (0,\infty)$.
This is immediate by substituting
$X_{v}D_{v} = M_v - \sum_{s\le v} C_s D_s$ in the first displayed equation.

## Valuing

If a derivative security pays amounts $\bar{A_j}$ at times $\bar{\tau_j}$ and there is
a hedge, $(\Gamma_t)_{t\in T}$, that replicates these amounts, the value
of the derivative is the cost of setting up the initial hedge: $V_0 = \Gamma_0\cdot X_0$.
The hedge must satisfy $A_t = 0$ if $t\not=\bar{\tau_j}$ for all $j$ (_self financing_)
and $A_t = \hat{A_j}$ if $t = \bar{\tau_j}$ for some $j$.

The formula $V_0 = E[\sum_j \hat{A_j} D_{\hat{\tau_j}}]$ is the
value of the initial hedge, $\Gamma_0\cdot X_0$. It can be computed using the
derivative security payments, $\bar{A_j}$, and the deflator.

An European option has a single payment, $\hat{A_T}$, at a fixed time $T$
and has value $V_0 = E \hat{A_T} D_T$. Sometimes it is useful to compute this
as $E \hat{A_T} D_T = E^{D_T} \hat{A_T} E D_T$, where $E^{D_T}$ is the expected value under
the Esscher transform of the probability measure defined by $dP^{D_T}/dP =
D_T/E D_T$. $P^{D_T}$ is called the _forward measure_ at time $T$.

## Hedging

The trades at time $t$ are similarly determined by $\Delta_t + \Gamma_t =
dV_t/dX_t$, where the last term is the Fr&#233;chet derivative.  Since we
know the position, $\Delta_t$, at time $t$ this determines the trades:
$\Gamma_t = dV_t/dX_t - \Delta_t$.

In the continuous time case where stocks are modelled by geometric
Brownian motion, this becomes classical Black-Scholes/Merton
delta hedging where delta is $\Delta$ and gamma is $\Gamma$. 
Under their mathematical assumptions, the hedge perfectly replicates the derivative.

In the real world, it is not possible to perfectly replicate the derivative security.
There is still research to be done on when to hedge and how to mangage this risk.

## Examples

The Black-Scholes/Merton model is specified by the exponential martingale
$M_t = (r, s\exp(\sigma B_t - \sigma^2t/2))$ and deflator $D_t = \exp(-\rho t)$.
No need for Ito's lemma, self-financing conditions, or PDE's, much less
the Hahn-Banach theorem.

## Canonical Deflator

There is a canonical choice for a deflator if repurchase agreements are available.

### Repurchase Agreements

Assume trades occur at discrete times, like they actually do, so $T = \{t_j\}$ where $t_0 < t_1 < \cdots$. 

A _repurchase agreement_ at time $t_j$, $R_j$, has price $X^{R_j}_{t_j}
= 1$ and cash flow $C^{R_j}_{t_{j+1}} = R_j$ so for any arbitrage free
model $D_{t_j} = E_{t_j}[R_j D_{t_{j+1}}]$. We assume $D_{t_{j+1}}$ is $\mathcal{A}_{t_j}$
measurable so $D_{t_j} = R_j D_{t_{j+1}}$ and $D_{t_j} = \Pi_{j<n} R_j^{-1}$.

Define the _forward repo rate_, $f_j$, by $R_j = \exp(f_j\,\Delta t_j)$
where $\Delta t_j = t_{j+1} - t_j$, so $D_{t_j} = \exp(-\sum_{j<n} f_j \Delta_{t_j})$.
The continuous time version of the _canonical deflator_ is
$D_t = \exp(-\int_0^t f_s\,ds)$.

As we will see below, the prices of all
(non-risky) fixed income securites are determined by the deflator.

### Futures

A _futures_ on underlying $S$ expiring at $t_n$ has price $X_{t_j} = 0$ for all $j$,
cash flows $C_{t_j} = \Phi_{t_j} - \Phi_{t_{j-1}}$ for $0 < j <\le n$, where
$\Phi_{t_j}$ is the futures _quote_ at time $t_j$, and $\Phi_{t_n} = S_{t_n}$
at expiration. Since $0 = E_{t_j} (\Phi_{t_{j+1}} - \Phi_{t_j}) D_{t_j}$, we
have $\Phi_{t_j} = E_{t_j} \Phi_{t_{j+1}}$ when $D_{t_j} > 0$ is $t_j$ measurable.

This shows futures quotes are a martingale.

### Forward

A _forward_ contract on underlying $S$ with stike $k$ expiring at time $t$ 
pays $A_t = S_t - k$ at $t$. It has initial value $V_0 = E[(S_t - k)D_t]
= S_0 - kE D_t$.
The _par forward_, $f$, is the strike that makes the initial value equal to zero:
$0 = V_0 = E(S_t - f)D_t$ so $S_0 = fED_t$. This formula is
called the _cost of carry_.

### Put-Call Parity

The first thing every trader checks when using a new model is _put-call parity_.
A (European) _put option_ on underlying $S$ with strike $k$ expiring at time $t$
pays $A^p_t = \max\{k - S_t,0\}$ at $t$.
A _call option_ on underlying $S$ with strike $k$ expiring at time $t$
pays $A^c_t = \max\{S_t - k, 0\}$ at $t$.
Since $A^c_t - A^p_t = S_t - k$ we have $V^c_0 - V^p_0 = c - p = S_0 - k ED_t$, where $c$ and $p$ are the value
of the call and put at time 0. This result is independent of any (arbitrage-free) model.

### Zero Coupon Bond

A _zero coupon bond_ pays one unit at maturity $u$.
An arbitrage free model requires the price at time $t$, $Z_t(u)$, to
satisfy $Z_t(u)D_t = E_t D_u$, so $Z_t(u) = E_t D_u/D_t = E_t\exp(-\int_t^u f_s\,ds)$.

### Forward Rate Agreement

A _forward rate agreement_ over the period $[u$, v]$ with coupon $f$ and
day count basis $\delta$ pays $-1$ unit at the
_effective date_ $u$, and $1 + f\delta(u,v)$ at the
_termination date_ $v$, where $\delta(u,v)$ is the [_day count
fraction_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Day_count_convention) for the
interval.  The day count fraction is approximately equal to the time in years from
$u$ to $v$ for any day count basis.

The _forward par coupon_ at time $t$, $F_t(u,v;\delta)$ is the coupon that makes the price at
time $t\le u$ equal to $0$: $0 = E_t -D_u + (1 + F_t(u,v;\delta)\delta(u,v))D_v$.
Hence the par coupon
$$
F_t(u,v;\delta) = (Z_t(u)/Z_t(v) - 1)/\delta(u,v)
$$
is determined by zero coupon bond prices. Note, writing $F_t = F_t(u,v;\delta)$
and $\delta = \delta(u,v)$,
$$
E_t F_t\delta D_v = F_t\delta E_t D_v = E_t[D_u - D_v].
$$

There are also forward rate agreements not involving the exchange of notional. A
(fixed rate) _payer_ has the single cash flow $(f - F_u(u,v;\delta))\delta(u,v)$ at time $v$.
A _receiver_ has the negative of this cash flow. The value at any time $t \le u$ is
determined by

% f delta - F delta' if different day count basis

\begin{align*}
V_t D_t &= E_t[(f - F_u(u,v;\delta))\delta(u,v) D_v] \\
        &= E_t[f\delta(u,v) D_v - E_u[D_u - D_v]]  \\
        &= E_t[f\delta(u,v) D_v - D_u + D_v]  \\
        &= E_t[-D_u + (1 + f\delta(u,v)) D_v] \\
\end{align*}

which is the same as for a forward rate agreement that does exchange notional.
These two types of FRAS's have very different risk characteristics.
If either counterparty defaults during the time notionals are exchanged the loss can
be much larger than when the payment is only the difference of the fixed and floating rate.

### Interest Rate Swap

An _interest rate swap_ with _calculation dates_ $(t_j)_{j=0}^n$ with coupon $c$, and
day count basis $\delta$ pays $-1$ unit at the effective date $t_0$, $c\delta(t_{j-1},t_j)$
at $t_j$, $0 < j < n$, and $1 + c\delta(t_{n-1},t_n)$ at _termination_ $t_n$.

The _swap par coupon_ at time $t$, $F_t(t_0,\ldots,t_n;\delta)$,
 is the coupon that makes the price at
time $t\le {t_0}$ equal to $0$:
$$
0 = E_t -D_{t_0} + \sum_{0<j<n} F_t\delta(t_{j-1},t_j) D_{t_j} + (1 + F_t\delta(t_{n-1},t_n) D_{t_n}.
$$
Hence the par coupon,
$F_t(t_0,\ldots,t_n;\delta) = (Z_t(t_0) - Z_t(t_n))/\sum_{0<j\le n}\delta(t_{j-1},t_j) Z_t(t_j)$,
is determined by zero coupon bond prices.

Note that if $n = 1$ this is identical to a forward rate agreement.

There are also interest rate swaps not involving the exchange of notional. A
(fixed rate) _payer_ has the cash flows $(c - F_{t_j}(t_{j-1},t_j;\delta))\delta(t_{j-1},t_j)$ at times $t_j$,
$0 < j \le n$.
A _receiver_ has the negative of these cash flow.

As with forward rate agreements, the coupon making the value at time $t$ equal to zero is
the swap par coupon.

### Floorlet

A _floorlet_ is a put option on an at-the-money _forward rate agreement_.
It pays $\max\{k - F_u(u,v),0\}\delta(u,v)$ at time $v$.
Its value at time $t < u$ is determined by $V_t D_t = E_t \max\{k - F_u(u,v),0\}\delta(u,v) D_u$.
Writing $F_u = F_u(u,v)$ and $\delta = \delta(u,v)$ we have

\begin{align*}
V_t D_t &= E_t[\max\{k - F_u,0\}\delta D_v] \\
        &= E_t[\max\{k\delta - (1/Z_u(v) - 1),0\} D_v] \\
        &= E_t[\max\{1 + k\delta - 1/Z_u(v),0\} D_v] \\
        &= E^*_t[\max\{1 + k\delta - 1/Z_u(v),0\}] E_tD_v \\
        &= E^*_t[\max\{1 + k\delta - 1/Z_u(v),0\}] Z_t(v)D_t \\
\end{align*}
where $E_t^*$ is the Esscher transform with $dP_t^*/dP_t = D_v/E_t D_v$.
The shows the value at $t$ of a caplet is
$V_t = E^*_t[\max\{1 + k\delta - 1/Z_u(v),0\}] Z_t(v)$.

## Remarks

The price of an instrument is not a number. Not only does it
depend on whether you are buying or selling, the amount being
purchased, and the counterparties involved, determine the price.

The atoms of finance are _exchanges_: $(t;a,i,c;a',i',c')$,
where $t$ is the time of the exchange, $a$ is the amount
of instrument $i$ the _buyer_, $c$, decides to obtain for the amount
$a'$ in instrument $i'$ from the _seller_, $c'$.
$a'$ in instrument $i'$ from the _seller_, $c'$.

_Price_ is a function $X\colon T\times A\times I\times C\times I\times C\to \mathbf{R}$,
where $T$ is the set of trading times, $A$ the set of amounts that can be traded,
$I$ is the set of market instruments, and $C$ is the set of legal trading entities.

<!--
### One Period Model

There is no need for probability measures. The Fundamental Theorem of
Asset Pricing is a geometic result. In the one period case where $T =
\{t_0,t_1\}$ the no arbitrage condition is there does not exist $\Gamma_0$
with $A_0 = -\Gamma_0\cdot X_0 > 0$ and $A_1 = \Gamma_0\cdot X_1\ge 0$.

In this case the FTAP states there is no arbitrage if and only if there
exists a positive measure, $\Pi$, on $\Omega$ with $X_0 = \int_\Omega X_1\,d\Pi$.

If $X_0$ belongs to the smallest closed cone containing the range of $X_1$,
then there exists a positive measure, $\Pi$, with $X_0 = \int_\Omega X_1\,d\Pi$.
For any $\gamma\in\mathbf{R}^I$ such that $\gamma\cdot X_1\ge0$ we have
$\gamma\cdot X_0  = \int_\Omega \gamma\cdot X_1\,d\Pi \ge0$ hence there
can be no arbitrage.

If $X_0$ does not belong to the smallest closed cone containing the range of $X_1$,
then there exists a hyperplane through the origin separating $X_0$ from the cone.
E.g., if $x$ is the closest point in the cone to $X_0$ then $\gamma = x - X_0$ will
do the job.
Let $\gamma$ be a vector in $\mathbf{R}$ normal to the hyperplane. We can choose $\gamma$
such that $\gamma\cdot X_0 < 0$ and $\gamma\cdot X_1(\omega) \ge0$ for all $\omega\in\Omega$.
This shows arbitrage exists.

If a zero coupon bond exists, i.e., there is a $\zeta\in\mathbf{R}^I$ with
$\zeta\cdot X_1(\omega) = 1$ for all $\omega\in\Omega$, then
$\zeta\cdot X_0 = \int_\Omega \zeta\cdot X_1\,d\Pi = ||\Pi|| = z$ is the price
of the zero coupon bond and $P = \Pi/z$ is a probability measure.

### Multi Period Model

Recall the _dual_ of the space of bounded
functions on a set $\Omega$, $B(\Omega)$, is the space of finitely additive
measures on $\Omega$, $ba(\Omega)$.
<!-- cite Dunford Schwartz -->

Let's assume $X_1\in B(\Omega,\mathbf{R}^I)$, the set of bounded functions from
$\Omega$ to $\mathbf{R}^I$. Consider the map $A\colon B$,
where $B = \mathbf{R} \oplus B(\Omega)$,
defined by $\Gamma \mapsto (-\Gamma_0\cdot X_0, \Gamma_0\cdot X_1)$. No arbitrage
says the range of $A$ does not intersect the cone $\{p \oplus P):p > 0, P\ge 0\}$.
Since the cone has an interior point, the Hahn-Banach theorem implies there exists
a hyperplane that does not intersect the cone. The hyperplane is the kernel of
an element in the dual space $B^* = \mathbf{R}\oplus ba(\Omega)$, where
$ba(\Omega)$ is the space of finitely additive measures. Call this element
$\pi\oplus\Pi$. We may assume $\pi = 1$.
-->
