# NOTES

Jump in with RRT.

Countably additive measures are the dual of C(X).

Emphasize technical difficulties.

Baire, Randon C_c(X).

Sigma algebras are overrated.

They are great for proofs involving
$\lim\limits_n\int f_n\,d\mu = \int\lim\limits_n f_n\,d\mu$.

But they involve a lot of complicated machinery.

$C(X)$ - continuous functions on topological space $X$

Topology - a study of the word 'near'.

A topology on $X$ is a collection of _open_ subsets of $X$ closed under finite
intersection and arbitrary union.

$M(X)$ - countably additive measures on Borel sets

A _measure_ satisfies $\mu(A\cup B) = \mu(A) + \mu(B) - \mu(A\cap B)$ and $\mu(\emptyset) = 0$.

It doesn't count things twice and nothing from nothing leaves nothing. (Billy Preston)

Inclusion/exclusion By induction ...

A _countably additive measure_ satisfies $\mu(\cup_j A_j) = \sum_j \mu(A_j)$ if $\{A_j\}$ are pairwise disjoint.

Note $\cap_{i\in I} A_i \subseteq A_j\cap A_k = \emptyset$ if $j\not=k$.

Borel sets are smallest $\sigma$-algebra generated by open sets.

Riesz Representation Theorem: $X$ compact Hausdorff, $C(X)^* = M(X)$.

The proof is hard. Rudin needs 6 pages in Real and Complex Analysis.

If $V$ a vector space then $V^*$ is all linear functionals $V\to\mathbf{R}$.

If $V$ a topological vector space then $V^*$ is all continuous linear functionals $V\to\mathbf{R}$.

Haar measure.

Baire sets generated by dense G-deltas.

Radon measures? Finite on compact sets, outer regular on Borel set, and inner regular on open sets.
Continuous functions with compact support. Bourbaki.

Mathematician's Kayfabe. (Learned from Eric Weinstein. The Portal.)

Kayfabe - "The portrayal of staged events within the (wrestling) industry as 'real' or 'true'"

Podcasts are the new news.

Not TeeVee news rich old white guys getting incinerated by the #MeToo asteroid pay their minions to parrot.

[Make it disappear. Deep State. Now back to our regularly scheduled programming.]

$X$ any set, $B(X)^* = ba(X)$.

$B(X)$ - bounded function on $X$

$ba(X)$ - finitely additive measures on $X$

The proof is easy.

If $L\in B(X)^*$ define $\lambda(A) = L(1_A)$ for any $A\subseteq X$,

where $1_A(x) = 1$ if $x\in A$ and $1_A(x) = 0$ if $x\not\in A$.

Well-defined since $\sum_j a_j 1_{A_j} = \sum_k b_k 1_{B_k}$
where $B_k$ are pairwise disjoint.

[two lines instead of 6 pages]

Algebras - a study of the words 'not' and 'and'.

We get 'or' from DeMoivre and 'implies' from subset.

Not $A$ or $B$ if and only if not $A$ and not $B$

If $A$ is a subset of $B$ then $x\in A$ implies $x\in B$.

If an algebra is finite the atoms form a partition.

The only set in an algebra contained in an _atom_ is the empty set.

If $\omega\in\Omega$ define $A_\omega = \cap\{A\in\mathcal{A}:\omega\in A\}$

The sets $\{A_\omega:\omega\in\Omega\}$ are a partition.

A partition represents _partial information_.

All probabilities are conditional probabilities

$E[X|\mathcal{A}] = (XP)|_{\mathcal{A}}$
